Adding rag evaluation application (#489)
NVIDIA-AI-Blueprints/rag: skill-source/.agents/skills/rag-eval/references/evaluate-rag-cli.md

# `evaluate_rag.py` CLI reference

> Read this file when the user asks about a **specific flag**, **default value**, **optional behavior**, or **full command examples** beyond the summary in the parent skill’s `SKILL.md`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Use when:
- The user wants to measure RAG pipeline quality.
- The user is asking about accuracy, relevancy, groundedness, or recall metrics.
- The user wants to run the filesystem benchmark evaluator (`scripts/eval/evaluate_rag.py`) with `corpus/` plus `train.json`.

```

> **Source of truth:** `scripts/eval/evaluate_rag.py` (`argparse`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `scripts/eval/evaluate_rag.p` and its `argparse` definitions as the source of truth for flags, default values, optional behaviors, and full command examples.
```

## Prerequisites

1. **`NVIDIA_API_KEY`** in the environment (script raises if missing) — RAGAS judge LLM.
2. **RAG server** at `http://<host>:<port>/v1/generate` (streaming).
3. **Ingestor** at `--ingestor_server_url` (default `http://localhost:8082`); code **appends** `/v1/` via `urljoin` — pass base URL without trailing `/v1`.

> 4. From repo root: `uv sync --extra rag-eval` (or equivalent so `uv run --extra rag-eval` resolves imports).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `NVIDIA_API_KEY` must be set in the environment; the script will raise an error if it is missing (used by the RAGAS judge LLM).
- RAG server must be reachable at `http://<host>:<port>/v1/generate` with streaming enabled.
- Ingestor must be reachable at `--ingestor_server_url` (default `http://localhost:8082`); the code appends `/v1/` via `urljoin`, so pass the base URL without a trailing `/v1`.
- From the repo root, run `uv sync --extra rag-eval` (or an equivalent command) so that `uv run --extra rag-eval` can resolve imports.
```

## Arguments

| Argument | Required | Default / notes |
|----------|----------|------------------|
| `--dataset-paths` | **Yes** (one or more paths) | Each root: `corpus/` + `train.json`. |

> | `--host` | **Yes** | RAG server host. |
> | `--port` | **Yes** | RAG server port. |
> | `--file-type` | No | Default `pdf`. If value contains substring `pdf`, PDF page counts are used for ingestion metrics. |
> | `--multiturn` | No | Flag. Use when `train.json` is object → list of turns. |
> | `--verbose` | No | Flag. |
> | `--thread` | No | Default `4` — parallel workers for queries (and related work). |
> | `--output_dir` | No | Default `results`; per-dataset subdir = dataset basename. |
> | `--retries` | No | Default `3` — **unused** in current code paths; kept for CLI compatibility. |
> | `--batch_size` | No | Default `1000` — ingestion batch size. |
> | `--top_k` | No | If set, sent as `reranker_top_k`; if omitted, not sent. |
> | `--vdb_top_k` | No | If set, sent as `vdb_top_k`; if omitted, not sent. |
> | `--ingestor_server_url` | No | Default `http://localhost:8082`. |
> | `--vdb_endpoint` | No | Default `http://milvus:19530` — **override** for real deployments. |
> | `--embedding_dimension` | No | Default `2048` — **must match** collection / embedding config. |
> | `--skip_ingestion` | No | Flag — query + score only (collection must exist). |
> | `--skip_evaluation` | No | Flag — ingest only. |
> | `--delete_collection` | No | Flag — delete collection **after** the run for that dataset. |
> | `--force_ingestion` | No | Flag — delete collection first, then re-ingest. |
> | `--collection` | No | Override collection name (default: dataset folder basename). |
> | `--model` | No | If set, passed to generate as `model`; else omitted (server default). |
> | `--llm_endpoint` | No | If set, passed as `llm_endpoint`; else omitted. |
> | `--timeout` | No | Default `180` seconds for RAG HTTP requests. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Argument | Required | Default / notes |
|----------|----------|------------------|
| `--dataset-paths` | Yes (one or more paths) | Each root must contain `corpus/` and `train.json`. |
| `--host` | Yes | RAG server host. |
| `--port` | Yes | RAG server port. |
| `--file-type` | No | Default `pdf`. If the value contains `pdf`, PDF page counts are used for ingestion metrics. |
| `--multiturn` | No | Flag. Use when `train.json` is an object mapping to a list of turns. |
| `--verbose` | No | Flag. |
| `--thread` | No | Default `4`; number of parallel workers for queries and related work. |
| `--output_dir` | No | Default `results`; each dataset gets a subdirectory named after the dataset basename. |
| `--retries` | No | Default `3`; currently unused in the code path, kept for CLI compatibility. |
| `--batch_size` | No | Default `1000`; ingestion batch size. |
| `--top_k` | No | If set, sent as `reranker_top_k`; if omitted, it is not sent. |
| `--vdb_top_k` | No | If set, sent as `vdb_top_k`; if omitted, it is not sent. |
| `--ingestor_server_url` | No | Default `http://localhost:8082`. |
| `--vdb_endpoint` | No | Default `http://milvus:19530`; override for real deployments. |
| `--embedding_dimension` | No | Default `2048`; must match the collection and embedding configuration. |
| `--skip_ingestion` | No | Flag; run query and scoring only (collection must already exist). |
| `--skip_evaluation` | No | Flag; perform ingestion only. |
| `--delete_collection` | No | Flag; delete the collection after the run for that dataset. |
| `--force_ingestion` | No | Flag; delete the collection first, then re-ingest. |
| `--collection` | No | Override collection name (default is the dataset folder basename). |
| `--model` | No | If set, passed to `generate` as `model`; otherwise omitted so the server default is used. |
| `--llm_endpoint` | No | If set, passed as `llm_endpoint`; otherwise omitted. |
| `--timeout` | No | Default `180` seconds for RAG HTTP requests. |
```

## Fixed behavior (not CLI flags)

- Ingestion uploads use **`blocking: true`** (synchronous ingestor response).
- The client **does not** send `split_options` on document upload — chunk size and overlap follow **ingestor server configuration**.

> - RAG queries use **`POST /v1/generate`** only; **`enable_filter_generator`** is **`false`** on generate payloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Fixed behavior (not CLI flags)

- Ingestion uploads always use `blocking: true` for a synchronous ingestor response.
- The client does not send `split_options` on document upload, so chunk size and overlap are controlled by the ingestor server configuration.
- RAG queries always use `POST /v1/generate`, and `enable_filter_generator` is set to `false` in the generate payloads.
```

## Examples

Single dataset, full ingest + eval (from **repository root**):

```bash
export NVIDIA_API_KEY="nvapi-..."

uv run --extra rag-eval python scripts/eval/evaluate_rag.py \
  --dataset-paths ./datasets/sample_eval \
  --host localhost \
  --port 8081 \
  --ingestor_server_url http://localhost:8082 \
  --vdb_endpoint http://localhost:19530 \
  --embedding_dimension 2048 \
  --output_dir results
```

Collection already populated:

```bash
uv run --extra rag-eval python scripts/eval/evaluate_rag.py \
  --dataset-paths ./datasets/sample_eval \
  --host localhost \
  --port 8081 \
  --ingestor_server_url http://localhost:8082 \
  --vdb_endpoint http://localhost:19530 \
  --embedding_dimension 2048 \
  --skip_ingestion \
  --output_dir results
```

Multi-turn `train.json`: add **`--multiturn`** to the same pattern.

## Outputs (under `--output_dir/<dataset_basename>/`)

- `rag_<label>_evaluation_summary.json` — mean metrics (+ token usage summary when present).
- `rag_<label>_evaluation_results.json` — per-metric lists and per-sample usage when present.
- `rag_<label>_evaluation_metrics.json` — ingestion KPIs + evaluation means + token usage struct.

> - Single-turn path also writes **`rag_<label>_evaluation_data.json`** before scoring. Multi-turn scoring may not write that intermediate file in the current code path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multi-turn `train.json`: add `--multiturn` to use the same pattern.

## Outputs (under `--output_dir/<dataset_basename>/`)

- `rag_<label>_evaluation_summary.json` — mean metrics plus a token usage summary when available.
- `rag_<label>_evaluation_results.json` — per-metric lists and per-sample usage details when available.
- `rag_<label>_evaluation_metrics.json` — ingestion KPIs, evaluation means, and the token usage structure.
- In the single-turn path, `rag_<label>_evaluation_data.json` is written before scoring; in the current multi-turn path, this intermediate file may not be written.
```
